>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, MARCH 11: THE VICE
PRESIDENT PROMOTING THE G.O.P.
HEALTH CARE PLAN IN A STATE WITH
ONE OF THE HIGHEST RATES OF
PEOPLE COVERED BY OBAMACARE; AND
IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT, AN
AMERICAN JOINS ISIS-- WHAT DREW
HIM TO THE TERRORIST GROUP?
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING,
AND THANKS FOR JOINING US.
VICE PRESIDENT MIKE PENCE HIT
THE ROAD TODAY TO BEGIN SELLING
THE VIRTUES OF THE REPUBLICAN
PARTY'S PLAN TO REPEAL AND
REPLACE THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT.
IN KENTUCKY THIS MORNING, MR.
PENCE PROMOTED THE WHITE HOUSE-
BACKED LEGISLATION MOVING
THROUGH THE HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES.
IT IS ONE OF 32 STATES THAT
EXPANDED FEDERALLY-FUNDED
MEDICAID COVERAGE FOR LOW-INCOME
AMERICANS UNDER OBAMACARE.
KENTUCKY HAS SEEN ITS UNINSURED
RATE DROP FROM 17% TO LESS THAN
7% THANKS IN PART TO A PRIVATE
INSURANCE EXCHANGE AND MEDICAID
COVERING 25% OF THE STATE'S
RESIDENTS.
BUT PENCE AND KENTUCKY'S CURRENT
GOVERNOR SAY MEDICAID EXPANSION
AND NEW INSURANCE PREMIUMS ARE
TOO COSTLY.
THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT ADDED 20
MILLION AMERICANS TO THE
INSURANCE ROLLS DURING THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION.
PENCE TOLD AN INVITATION-ONLY
AUDIENCE OF 100 PEOPLE THAT
OBAMACARE IS A "NIGHTMARE THAT
IS ABOUT TO END."
>> THE TRUTH IS, KENTUCKY IS A
TEXTBOOK EXAMPLE OF OBAMACARE'S
FAILURES.
HERE IN THE BLUEGRASS STATE,
PREMIUMS SKYROCKETED BY AN
AVERAGE OF 24% LAST YEAR WITH
SOME PLANS SPIKING BY 47%.
NEARLY HALF OF THE STATE HAS ONE
HEALTH INSURER TO CHOSE FROM.
AND NEXT YEAR, HUMANA,
HEADQUARTERED RIGHT HERE IN
LOUISVILLE, IS PULLING OUT OF
KENTUCKY'S OBAMACARE EXCHANGE.
>> Sreenivasan: PENCE SAID THE
HOUSE PLAN WOULD REPEAL THE
INDIVIDUAL MANDATE TO HAVE
INSURANCE AND TAKE AWAY THE
PENALTIES IF YOU REMAIN
UNINSURED; REPLACE GOVERNMENT
SUBSIDIES TO HELP PAY FOR
INSURANCE WITH TAX CREDITS;
REPLACE MEDICAID EXPANSION WITH
BLOCK GRANTS TO STATES; CONTINUE
TO PREVENT INSURERS FROM
DROPPING PEOPLE WITH PRE-
EXISTING CONDITIONS.
TWO HOUSE COMMITTEES HAVE PASSED
THE PLAN, WHICH FACES A HOUSE
BUDGET COMMITTEE VOTE NEXT
BEFORE GOING TO THE HOUSE FLOOR.
OFFICIALS SAY TWIN SUICIDE
BOMBINGS IN DAMASCUS KILLED AT
LEAST 40 PEOPLE AND WOUNDED MORE
THAN 100 OTHERS TODAY.
THE ATTACKERS TARGETED BUSES
CARRYING SHIITE PILGRIMS FROM
NEIGHBORING IRAQ WHO WERE
VISITING HOLY SHRINES IN THE
SYRIAN CAPITAL AND PLANNED TO
PRAY AT A CEMETERY WHERE
PROMINENT RELIGIOUS FIGURES ARE
BURIED.
THERE'S BEEN NO CLAIM OF
RESPONSIBILITY, BUT ISLAMIC
STATE-- OR ISIS-- MILITANTS HAVE
CLAIMED ATTACKS ON SHIITE
SHRINES IN DAMASCUS IN THE PAST.
IN INDIA, PRIME MINISTER
NARENDRA MODI'S PARTY HAS WON A
LANDSLIDE VICTORY IN ELECTIONS
IN THE COUNTRY'S BIGGEST STATE.
RESULTS ANNOUNCED TODAY SHOW HIS
HINDU NATIONALIST PARTY, THE
B.J.P., CAPTURED 75% OF THE
LEGISLATIVE SEATS IN UTTAR
PRADESH, WHICH HAS A POPULATION
OF MORE THAN 200 MILLION.
THE VICTORY GIVES MODI MOMENTUM
TOWARD WINNING A SECOND TERM IN
THE 2019 ELECTIONS AND PUSHING
FOR MORE ECONOMIC AND POLITICAL
REFORMS.
THE WIN ALSO OVERCAME MODI'S
CONTROVERSIAL DECISION LAST YEAR
TO FIGHT CORRUPTION BY SUDDENLY
REPLACING HIGH VALUE BANK NOTES,
WHICH TEMPORARILY LEFT BANKS AND
MILLIONS OF INDIANS WITHOUT
CASH.
SOUTH KOREA'S IMPEACHED
PRESIDENT REMAINS OUT OF SIGHT A
FULL DAY AFTER THE COUNTRY'S
HIGHEST COURT REMOVED HER FROM
OFFICE DUE TO A CORRUPTION
SCANDAL.
SUPPORTERS OF PARK GEUN-HYE,
DECRYING A "POLITICAL
ASSASSINATION," WERE WELL
OUTNUMBERED ON THE STREETS OF
SEOUL TODAY BY THOUSANDS OF
DEMONSTRATORS WHO SUPPORT HER
REMOVAL.
NEARLY 20,000 POLICE WERE
DEPLOYED TO AVOID A REPEAT OF
YESTERDAY'S CLASHES BETWEEN THE
TWO SIDES.
PARK ASSUMED OFFICE IN 2012 AS
THE COUNTRY'S FIRST FEMALE
PRESIDENT.
AN ELECTION TO REPLACE HER IS
EXPECTED WITHIN TWO MONTHS.
A DIPLOMATIC DISPUTE BETWEEN
NATO ALLIES TURKEY AND THE
NETHERLANDS ESCALATED TODAY WHEN
THE NETHERLANDS, CITING SECURITY
CONCERNS, BLOCKED A SCHEDULED
VISIT BY THE TURKISH FOREIGN
MINISTER TO THE DUTCH CITY OF
ROTTERDAM.
FOREIGN MINISTER MEVLUT
CAVUSOGLU INTENDED TO SPEAK TO A
PLANNED RALLY OF TURKISH
IMMIGRANTS IN THE NETHERLANDS
WHO ARE ELIGIBLE TO VOTE IN NEXT
MONTH'S REFERENDUM IN TURKEY.
THE REFERENDUM COULD GRANT
TURKISH PRESIDENT RECEP ERDOGAN
GREATER POWERS.
ABOUT 200,000 TURKS LIVE IN THE
NETHERLANDS.
ERDOGAN BLASTED DUTCH OFFICIALS
FOR TURNING BACK THE MINISTER'S
PLANE, CALLING THEM "NAZI
REMNANTS" AND SAYING "THEY ARE
FASCISTS."
DUTCH PRIME MINISTER MARK RUTTE,
WHO IS UP FOR RE-ELECTION ON
WEDNESDAY, SAID ERDOGAN'S
COMMENT WAS "CRAZY" AND "WAY OUT
OF LINE."
>> Sreenivasan: THE NEW
ADMINISTRATOR OF THE
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY,
SCOTT PRUITT, RAISED EYEBROWS
THIS WEEK WHEN HE SAID IN AN
INTERVIEW THAT CARBON DIOXIDE IS
NOT THE PRIMARY CAUSE OF GLOBAL
WARMING AND CLIMATE CHANGE,
OPINIONS AT ODDS WITH SCIENTIFIC
CONSENSUS AND DECADES OF DATA.
PRUITT, THE FORMER OKLAHOMA
ATTORNEY GENERAL, HAS REPORTEDLY
STARTED TO STACK THE E.P.A.
STAFF WITH LIKE-MINDED SKEPTICS.
JOINING ME NOW FROM WASHINGTON
TO DISCUSS WHAT THIS MEANS FOR
ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY IS
"WASHINGTON POST" REPORTER BRADY
DENNIS.
BRADY, THIS ISN'T NECESSARILY
NEW ON HOW SCOTT PRUITT THINKS
ABOUT THE ENVIRONMENT.
>> NO, I MEAN, HE'S SAID BEFORE,
AND MOST RECENTLY, I THINK, IN
HIS CONFIRMATION HEARINGS IN THE
SENATE, THAT THIS IDEA OF
UNCERTAINTY-- WE DON'T REALLY
KNOW HOW MUCH OF THE WARMING OF
THE PLANET IS DRIVEN BY HUMAN
ACTIVITY.
I THINK WHAT HE SAID THE OTHER
DAY WAS A STEP FURTHER THAN THAT
BY SAYING, "I DON'T BELIEVE THAT
HUMANS ARE THE PRIMARY CAUSE OF
GLOBAL WARMING."
SO IT IS A DEGREE FURTHER, AND I
THINK THAT'S WHY YOU SAW A LOT
OF THE BACKLASH THAT MR. PRUITT
IS GETTING.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT WAS THAT
BACKLASH LIKE?
WHAT DID ENVIRONMENTAL GROUPS
AND LOBBIES SAY?
>> IT WAS SWIFT.
THEY POINTED OUT, CORRECTLY SO,
THAT DECADES OF RESEARCH POINT
TO HUMAN ACTIVITY AS BEING THE
PRIMARY DRIVER, AND THIS IS TRUE
THROUGH RESEARCHERS AT PLACES
LIKE THE E.P.A., WHERE
MR. PRUITT, YOU KNOW, IS NOW THE
ADMINISTRATOR.
ALSO, NASA AND NOAA AND
INTERNATIONAL GROUPS OF
SCIENTISTS HAVE FOUND THIS AS
WELL FOR MANY DECADES NOW.
THE INTERESTING THING IS THAT IT
DIDN'T JUST PUT HIM AT ODDS WITH
SCIENTISTS OR WITH ENVIRONMENTAL
GROUPS.
YOU KNOW, EVEN LARGE-- SOME OF
THE NATION'S LARGEST BUSINESSES
NOW AGREE THAT THE CLIMATE IS
WARMING IN THIS WAY AND THAT
THIS IS A PROBLEM THAT NEEDS TO
BE DEALT WITH, COMPANIES LIKE
SHELL AND CONOCOPHILLIPS, AND
OTHERS, EXXON, HAVE SUPPORTED
THE PARIS CLIMATE AGREEMENTS
WHICH AIMS TO TACKLE THIS
PROBLEM.
>> Sreenivasan: SO WHAT ARE SOME
OF THE POLICY IMPLICATIONS IF
THE HEAD OF THE E.P.A. DOESN'T
BELIEVE THAT CLIMATE CHANGED IS
CAUSED BY HUMANS OR CARBON
DIOXIDE?
>> IT RAISES A LOT OF POLICY
QUESTIONS, AND ALL YOU HAVE TO
DO IS LOOK BACK TO THE LAST
ADMINISTRATION.
THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION MADE
THIS A PRIORITY AND PROBABLY THE
SIGNATURE EFFORT WAS A
REGULATION KNOWN AS THE CLEAN
POWER PLAN, WHICH SOUGHT TO
LIMIT CARBON DIOXIDE EMISSIONS
FROM THE NATION'S POWER PLANTS.
SCOTT PRUITT, AS OKLAHOMA
ATTORNEY GENERAL, SUED OVER
THAT, AS DID MANY OTHER FOLKS,
AND THAT'S CURRENTLY TIED UP IN
COURT.
HE'S CURRENTLY, YOU KNOW, SAID
HE PLANS TO UNWIND THAT, AS DOES
DONALD TRUMP.
WE'RE EXPECTING AN EXECUTIVE
ORDER TO THAT EFFECT SOON.
SO THERE ARE A RANGE OF
REGULATIONS THAT THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION TRIED TO PUT IN
PLACE TO LIMIT THE NATION'S
CARBON DIOXIDE, CO-2, EMISSIONS
AND I THINK WE COULD VERY WELL
SEE, AND MOST PEOPLE EXPECT TO
SEE A LOT OF THAT ROLLED BACK.
>> Sreenivasan: SO IF THE
CARBON EMISSIONS, OR AT LEAST
THE RULES GOVERNING CARBON
EMISSIONS ARE ROLLED BACK, IF
OUR CLEAN AIR PLAN OR OUR--
PERHAPS OUR ADHERENCE TO THE
PARIS CLIMATE ACCORDS CHANGES,
WHAT HAPPENS?
>> THAT'S A REALLY GOOD
QUESTION.
AND IN PART, IT'S A GOOD
QUESTION BECAUSE THERE'S A LOT
OF MOVING PARTS.
AS I MENTIONED, THE CLEAN POWER
PLANT IS TIED UP IN THE FEDERAL
COURTS RIGHT NOW, AND YET,
CARBON EMISSIONS HAVE FALLEN,
AND A LOT OF STATES ARE ON PACE
TO MEET THE TARGETS THAT THAT
SETS.
SO IN SOME WAYS, THE MARKET IS
DICTATING SOME OF THIS-- WIND
ENERGY, SOLAR ENERGY-- ARE ALL
GAINING STEAM, GAINING GROUND.
TO SOME EXTENT IT'S OUT OF THE
GOVERNMENT'S HANDS.
THAT SAID, I THINK IT WOULD SEND
A BIG SIGNAL DOMESTICALLY AND
INTERNATIONALLY IF THE TRUMP
ADMINISTRATION WERE TO UNWIND
ALL THESE REGULATIONS THAT SAY
THAT IT'S A PRIORITY FOR THE
UNITED STATES TO TACKLE THIS
PROBLEM.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
BRADY DENNIS OF THE "WASHINGTON
POST" JOINING US FROM D.C.
TODAY.
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: SINCE THE UNITED
STATES SHIFTED ITS
COUNTERTERRORISM FOCUS FROM AL
QAEDA TO THE ISLAMIC STATE IN
IRAQ AND SYRIA-- OR ISIS-- THE
F.B.I. HAS OPENED INVESTIGATIONS
OF POTENTIAL ISIS SUPPORTERS IN
ALL 50 STATES, AND FEDERAL
PROSECUTORS HAVE CHARGED MORE
THAN 120 INDIVIDUALS FOR
SUPPORTING ISIS IN SOME WAY.
A NEW BOOK UNVEILS THE THINKING
OF ISIS SUPPORTERS AROUND THE
WORLD, INCLUDING ONE LITTLE-
KNOWN AMERICAN SAID TO BE AMONG
THE GROUP'S LEADERS.
IT'S CALLED "THE WAY OF
STRANGERS: ENCOUNTERS WITH THE
ISLAMIC STATE," BY GRAEME WOOD,
A NATIONAL CORRESPONDENT FOR
"THE ATLANTIC" WHO HAS SPENT
TIME AS A JOURNALIST WITH MANY
ISIS SYMPATHIZERS.
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND'S PHIL
HIRSCHKORN SAT DOWN WITH WOOD TO
LEARN MORE.
>> Reporter: AMERICANS SINCE
9/11 HAVE REALLY GRAPPLED WITH
THIS QUESTION: "WHY DO THEY HATE
US?"
FROM YOUR DISCUSSIONS WITH ISIS
SUPPORTERS AROUND THE WORLD, WAS
IT: A, THAT THEY DON'T LIKE OUR
LIBERAL SOCIAL MORES RELATIVE TO
THEIRS?
OR B, THEY DON'T LIKE OUR
FOREIGN POLICY, OUR MILITARY
DEPLOYMENTS IN SOME MUSLIM-
DOMINATED COUNTRIES?
OR WOULD YOU SAY IT WAS
SOMETHING ELSE?
>> I THINK WHEN WE LOOK AT THE
REASONS THAT OSAMA BIN LADEN
GAVE FOR FIGHTING AGAINST THE
UNITED STATES, THEY WERE VERY
CLEAR.
THEY WERE OFTEN VERY POLITICAL.
SO ISRAEL WOULD BE MENTIONED.
AUTOCRACIES IN THE MIDDLE EAST.
WHEN I SPOKE TO PEOPLE WHO WERE
ASSOCIATED WITH ISIS, IT WAS A
VERY DIFFERENT TYPE OF HATRED.
THEY WOULD EMPHASIZE THIS
CONCEPT OF LOYALTY AND
DISAVOWAL.
LOYALTY TO ALL MUSLIMS,
DISAVOWAL AND HATRED OF NON-
MUSLIMS.
SO, FOR THEM, IT WAS AN INHERENT
OBLIGATION OF THEIR RELIGION TO
HATE ME.
AND THEY WOULD EVEN SAY AFTER
THE MOST FRIENDLY INTERACTIONS,
"OH, BY THE WAY, WE STILL HATE
YOU."
>> Reporter: IN YOUR VIEW, IS
ONE OF THE KEY FACTORS THAT
SEPARATES ISIS FROM AL QAEDA THE
FACT THAT THE GROUP DECLARED A
CALIPHATE, TERRITORY?
>> ONE IS THAT THEY HAD
TERRITORY.
THEY HAD A STATE THAT THEY
CALLED PEOPLE TO COME TO JOIN BY
MIGRATION TO THE STATE.
WHEREAS AL QAEDA WAS SENDING
PEOPLE OUT TO ATTACK FROM THEIR
BASES.
I SEE ISIS AS, IN A WAY, BEING
TWO SEPARATE ENTITIES.
ONE IS THE TERRITORIAL ENTITY IN
IRAQ AND SYRIA THAT'S SUBJECT TO
THE LOCAL DYNAMICS OF SYRIAN AND
IRAQI POLITICS.
AND THE OTHER IS THIS KIND OF
GLOBAL CALIPHATE IDEA THAT'S
ENERGIZING PEOPLE IN MANY
DIFFERENT COUNTRIES, AND THAT
WILL PROBABLY SURVIVE THE
EXTINCTION OF THE TERRITORY OF
THAT FIRST CALIPHATE.
>> Reporter: AS YOU INTERVIEWED
SOME OF THESE ISIS SUPPORTERS
AND FOLLOWERS, INFLUENCERS, DID
YOU FEEL THEY WERE TRYING TO
CONVINCE YOU OF THEIR
RIGHTEOUSNESS, THEIR RIGHTNESS,
OR EVEN TO RECRUIT YOU?
>> YES.
IN MANY CASES, THEY WERE
SPEAKING TO ME BECAUSE I THINK
THEY THOUGHT THAT I MIGHT JOIN
THEIR MOVEMENT.
AND THEY WOULD EXPLICITLY PHRASE
IT LIKE THIS.
THEY'D SAY, "WE'RE GIVING YOU AN
INVITATION.
WE LIKE YOU," THEY WOULD SAY.
"WE DON'T WANT YOU TO BURN
FOREVER.
WE WANT YOU TO BE ON OUR SIDE
AND SHARE IN YOUR PART OF
PARADISE."
I WAS ABLE TO HAVE INTERACTIONS
WITH THEM THAT WERE ENJOYABLE,
THAT WERE SOCIAL, THAT WERE
THINGS LIKE PLAYING SOCCER, LIKE
HANGING OUT IN CAFES, LIKE
HAVING LONG DISCUSSIONS ABOUT
WHAT MATTERS TO US IN LIFE.
I REALLY ACTUALLY TREASURED
THOSE DISCUSSIONS AND LOOK BACK
AT THEM FONDLY, EVEN THOUGH THE
CONTENT OF THEM WAS, IN MANY
CASES, GENOCIDAL.
>> Reporter: SO YOUR BOOK TITLE,
"THE WAY OF THE STRANGERS,"
SEEMS TO REFER TO ANOTHER THING
THAT A LOT OF THE ISIS
SUPPORTERS YOU MET HAVE IN
COMMON, THAT THEY DON'T REALLY
FEEL AT HOME EVEN IN THEIR HOME
COUNTRIES.
CAN YOU EXPLAIN THAT?
>> THEY WOULD OFTEN QUOTE A
SAYING OF THE PROPHET THAT ISLAM
BEGAN AS A STRANGE THING, AND IT
WILL RETURN TO BEING A STRANGE
THING AS IT WAS IN THE
BEGINNING.
SO, "BLESSED BE THE STRANGERS."
AND THEY WOULD OFTEN ASSOCIATE
THEMSELVES WITH THAT.
THEY REALLY FELT THAT THEIR
VIEWS WERE STRANGE EVEN TO THEM.
THEY WERE COMING FROM PLACES
LIKE THE UNITED STATES, LIKE THE
U.K., LIKE AUSTRALIA.
AND TO THEM, TOO, IT WAS STRANGE
THAT THEY FELT DRAWN TO A
CALIPHATE IN THE MIDDLE EAST, A
COUNTRY... IN COUNTRIES WHERE
THAT THEY HAD IN MANY CASES
NEVER BEEN TO AT ALL, HAD NO
ASSOCIATION WITH.
THEY FELT LIKE THEY WERE NOT ANY
LONGER AT HOME IN THEIR OWN
COUNTRY.
THEY WERE ALSO STRANGERS IN THE
SENSE THAT THEY WERE INTENDING
TO IMMIGRATE.
>> Reporter: THE FOCUS OF WOOD'S
BOOK EXCERPT IN "THE ATLANTIC"
MAGAZINE THIS MONTH IS AN ISIS
MEMBER KNOWN AS "YAHYA THE
AMERICAN."
HIS REAL NAME IS JOHN GEORGELAS,
THE SON OF A CAREER MILITARY
OFFICER WHO FOR A TIME LIVED IN
THE DALLAS SUBURB WHERE WOOD
GREW UP.
BROUGHT UP IN THE GREEK ORTHODOX
CHRISTIAN TRADITION, GEORGELAS
WAS A LONER, DRUG USER, AND
JUNIOR COLLEGE DROPOUT WHO
DRIFTED TO A NEW FAITH.
HE DECIDES TO CONVERT TO ISLAM
TWO MONTHS AFTER 9/11.
HOW DID THAT COME ABOUT, AS FAR
AS YOU KNOW?
>> IN A MOMENT OF HAVING LEFT
HIS HOME, FIRST YEAR OF COLLEGE
KIND OF REBELLION, HE STEPPED
INTO A MOSQUE ON THE FIRST DAY
OF RAMADAN, FIRST RAMADAN AFTER
SEPTEMBER 11, AND HE CONVERTED.
AND FROM THERE, THE PATH WAS
GREASED TOWARD JIHAD.
I THINK HE WAS REALLY TRYING TO
REBEL, AND TO DO THAT IN THE
MOST PRONOUNCED WAY POSSIBLE.
AND THAT, FOR HIM, MEANT
CONVERTING, MOVING TO DAMASCUS,
AND MEMORIZING THIS TEXTBOOK,
DICTIONARY OF ARABIC, AND
LEARNING THE LANGUAGE TO SUCH A
DEGREE THAT WHEN I SHOW HIS
WRITINGS NOW IN ARABIC TO NATIVE
SPEAKERS OF THE LANGUAGE, THEY
CAN'T TELL THAT THIS WAS DONE BY
A COMMUNITY COLLEGE DROPOUT FROM
TEXAS.
AND SO, FOR HIM TO MASTER THE
LANGUAGE IS REALLY THE FIRST
STEP IN HIS BECOMING A CLERIC,
AS HE EVENTUALLY HAS BECOME
WITHIN THE ISLAMIC STATE.
>> Reporter: HOW WERE HIS
WRITINGS DISSEMINATED?
WAS IT OVER SOCIAL MEDIA?
HOW DID HE BUILD AN AUDIENCE?
>> BY GOING ONLINE, DISCOVERING
THAT THERE WERE PEOPLE OUT THERE
WHO WERE CURIOUS ABOUT THIS.
AND HE DID HAVE A WEB SITE THAT
CONSISTED OF WRITINGS IN ARABIC
AND ENGLISH.
LATER ON, ONCE HE HAD FORMALLY
JOINED THE ISLAMIC STATE, ONCE
HE ACTUALLY GOT THERE, HE WAS
DISSEMINATING HIS WRITINGS IN
THE PRINCIPLE MAGAZINES AND
CHANNELS OF THE ISLAMIC STATE,
AND NAMELY THE MAGAZINE "DABIQ."
"DABIQ" IS A REFERENCE TO A
LOCATION THAT'S REALLY THE PLACE
WHERE THE SORT OF THE COIN TOSS
THAT BEGINS THE END OF THE WORLD
WILL HAPPEN.
AND FROM THERE, ARMIES WILL
COLLIDE, CITIES WILL FALL,
EMPIRES WILL COLLAPSE.
AND EVENTUALLY, WHEN THINGS GET
REALLY INTERESTING, THE
ANTICHRIST WILL APPEAR, AND
JESUS, FROM CHRISTIANITY, WILL
COME BACK AS A MUSLIM AND FIGHT
ON THE SIDE OF THE ISLAMIC
STATE.
>> Reporter: THEY BELIEVE THIS?
>> THEY CERTAINLY DO.
THIS IS SOMETHING THAT HAS BEEN
FROM THE VERY START A
CENTERPIECE OF THEIR PROPAGANDA.
>> Reporter: WOOD REPORTS, IN
2013, GEORGELAS BECAME ONE OF AT
LEAST 65 AMERICANS KNOWN TO HAVE
JOINED ISIS OVERSEAS.
HE MOVED TO THE GROUP'S DE FACTO
CAPITAL, RAQQA, SYRIA, BRINGING
HIS PREGNANT WIFE AND THEIR
THREE YOUNG CHILDREN.
BUT HIS WIFE DIDN'T STAY FOR
LONG.
SHE COMES BACK TO AMERICA, COMES
BACK TO TEXAS, MOVES IN WITH HIS
PARENTS FOR A TIME, AND THEN SHE
DECIDES TO DIVORCE HER HUSBAND.
WHERE DO THINGS STAND NOW?
>> YAHYA'S FAMILY TOOK IN THE
GRANDKIDS, AND I THINK THEY
REALLY THOUGHT OF THEIR SON AS
LOST.
HE HAD JOINED ISIS AT THIS
POINT.
THERE WAS A VERY LOW CHANCE THAT
HE WAS EVER COMING BACK.
AND SO THEY DECIDED TO TRADE HIM
FOR A BUNCH OF NICE GRANDKIDS,
WHO THEY CAN RAISE TO NOT FOLLOW
THE PATH THAT THEIR SON HAD
ACTUALLY TAKEN.
THAT'S WHERE IT STANDS RIGHT
NOW, AS FAR AS I KNOW, IS THAT
THE KIDS ARE BEING RAISED IN A
CHRISTIAN HOUSEHOLD IN TEXAS AND
ARE DOING FINE, AND CERTAINLY
BETTER THAN THEY WOULD BE DOING
IF THEY WERE IN RAQQA.
I THINK NO PARENT REALLY WANTS
TO FACE UP TO THE FACT THAT
THEIR SON HAS GONE DOWN THE PATH
THAT JOHN GEORGELAS HAS, AND
ESPECIALLY KNOWING THAT IT'S NOT
EVEN SOMETHING THAT COULD REALLY
HAVE BEEN PREVENTED.
THEY'RE NOT BAD PARENTS.
THEY HAVEN'T DONE ANYTHING TO
PUSH HIM DOWN THAT PATH.
BUT HE'S BROUGHT EMBARRASSMENT
TO THE FAMILY.
>> Reporter: WOOD REPORTS THAT
GEORGELAS, OR YAHYA THE
AMERICAN, IS CLOSE TO ISIS
LEADER ABU BAKR AL-BAGHDADI, AND
THAT BEFORE AL-BAGHDADI
PROCLAIMED THE ISIS CALIPHATE IN
MOSUL, IRAQ, IN 2014, GEORGELAS
HAD ADVOCATED THAT VERY MOVE.
>> IF YOU LOOK AT JOHN
GEORGELAS' WRITINGS BEFORE THE
DECLARATION OF THE CALIPHATE,
THEY WERE CONSTANTLY SAYING THAT
ONE OF THE REQUIREMENTS OF THE
RELIGION IS THE APPOINTMENT OF A
SINGLE PERSON, AN IMAM, A
CALIPH, TO LEAD THE MUSLIMS.
SO IN THE MONTHS BEFORE ABU BAKR
AL-BAGHDADI ACTUALLY DID THAT IN
MOSUL, JOHN GEORGELAS WENT TO
DIFFERENT EMIRS OF ISIS AND
SAID, "LOOK, YOU'RE IN SIN IF
YOU DON'T DO THIS."
>> Reporter: FOR THE AMERICANS
WHO GET CAUGHT UP IN JIHADIST
IDEOLOGY, WHY DO YOU THINK THE
DRAW FOR THEM STILL IS TO GO TO
SYRIA OR TO GO TO IRAQ, EVEN IF
THAT MEANS FIGHTING AGAINST
AMERICAN SOLDIERS?
>> FIRST, IT MUST BE SAID THAT
THE FLOW HAS PRETTY MUCH
STOPPED.
THE NUMBER OF PEOPLE WHO ARE
TRAVELING IS SOMEWHERE BETWEEN
ZERO AND ONE ON AVERAGE PER
MONTH, WHICH IS DOWN FROM TEN TO
12 A YEAR AGO.
THAT'S A BIG CHANGE.
BUT FOR THESE PEOPLE THAT THEY
ARE TOLD FROM THE START, AS SOON
AS THEY ARE INTERESTED IN ISIS
PROPAGANDA, THAT THEY HAVE AN
OBLIGATION TO LIVE IN MUSLIM
LANDS; THAT AS A MUSLIM, THEY
CAN NEVER FULLY REALIZE THEIR
RELIGION AS LONG AS THEY ARE
BEING RULED IN A SECULAR
CHRISTIAN SOCIETY.
SO THAT'S A VERY STRONG IMPULSE.
IF THEY'RE BEING MADE TO FEEL
UNWELCOME AT HOME THROUGH OTHER
POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS,
ESPECIALLY, THEN THAT'S GOING TO
BE A PUSH FOR THEM TO GO FIND A
HOME ELSEWHERE.
>> Reporter: WHAT WOULD YOU SAY
IS THE BIGGEST MISCONCEPTION
ABOUT ISIS, BASED ON YOUR
TRAVELS?
>> I THINK THERE IS A KIND OF
FOLK MISCONCEPTION, A FOLK
BELIEF ABOUT WHAT BRINGS PEOPLE
TO ISIS THAT INVOLVES THEIR
HAVING NO OPPORTUNITIES AT HOME,
THAT INVOLVES THEIR NOT HAVING A
JOB.
IN FACT, MANY PEOPLE I SPOKE TO
WHO ARE SYMPATHETIC TO ISIS ARE
CERTAINLY SMART ENOUGH TO HOLD
DOWN A JOB.
THEY HAVE OPPORTUNITIES AT HOME.
PEOPLE ARE GOING TO ISIS NOT
BECAUSE THEY HAVE A NIHILISTIC
DESIRE TO JUST KILL, KILL, KILL,
BUT BECAUSE THEY HAVE AN
IDEALISTIC VIEW OF WHAT THEY
HAVE WAITING FOR THEM.
THEY HAVE AN OPPORTUNITY TO BE
PART OF SOMETHING BIG, AND THEY
SEE IT IN THAT POSITIVE WAY.
>> Sreenivasan: FIND A NEW BOOK
RECOMMENDATION FROM IRISH AUTHOR
COLUM McCANN ON OUR WEB SITE AT
www.pbs.org/newshour.
THE NATION'S INFRASTRUCTURE
RECEIVED AN OVERALL GRADE OF "D-
PLUS" IN A REPORT CARD PUBLISHED
THIS WEEK BY THE AMERICAN
SOCIETY OF CIVIL ENGINEERS, THE
SAME GRADE THE GROUP ISSUED IN
2013.
AMONG THE 16 CATEGORIES GRADED:
BRIDGES RECEIVED A "C-PLUS";
ROADS, DAMS AND AIRPORTS, A "D";
WHILE MASS TRANSIT CAME IN WITH
A "D-MINUS."
THE GROUP'S SENIOR MANAGING
DIRECTOR, CASEY DINGES, JOINS ME
NOW FROM WASHINGTON TO EXPLAIN
THESE VERY LOW GRADES.
MR. DINGES, THESE ARE NOT GRADES
THAT WE WOULD WANT TO SEE ON ANY
CHILD'S REPORT CARD, YET I
GUESS WE TOLERATE THEM AT SUCH
CRUCIAL THINGS AS THE ROADS AND
BRIDGES WE DRIVE ON AND THE
WATER THAT WE DRINK.
>> I THINK THE WAY THE ISSUE MAY
PLAY OUT IS THE DEGRADATION IS
MAYBE SO IMPERCEPTIBLE TO THE
PUBLIC USERS, THE TRAVELING
PUBLIC.
YOU KNOW, THE WATER MAIN
BREAK, EVEN THOUGH IT HAPPENS
EVERY 2.5 MINUTES IN THE UNITED
STATES, PEOPLE SAY, "IT'S JUST
NOT HAPPENING MY NEIGHBORHOOD,
SO I'M NOT THINKING ABOUT IT."
TRAFFIC CONGESTION IS A HUGE
ISSUE IN MAJOR METROPOLITAN
AREAS.
PAVEMENT ISSUES YOU'LL FIND IN
REGIONS ALL ACROSS THE COUNTRY
AFFECT PEOPLE, BUT MAYBE NOT
ENOUGH TO MAKE IT A TOP-OF-MIND
ISSUE.
AT THIS POINT, WE ARE SOMEWHAT
ENCOURAGED TO SEE PRESIDENTIAL
LEADERSHIP BEING EXERTED ON THE
INFRASTRUCTURE ISSUE.
BUT FUNDING IS THE KEY THING.
THAT WOULD BE THE HEAVY LIFT FOR
THE CONGRESS.
>> Sreenivasan: THE
TRILLION-DOLLAR PLAN THAT
PRESIDENT TRUMP HAS ALLUDED TO
AND PERHAPS WILL PROPOSE IN
WRITING IS NOT ENOUGH TO COVER
THE KINDS OF UPGRADES THAT
YOU'RE SAYING OUR INFRASTRUCTURE
NEEDS TODAY.
>> IT'S NOT.
YOU KNOW, THE GAP WE IDENTIFY IS
$2 TRILLION OVER 10 YEARS.
THAT'S HOW WE HAVE THE $200
BILLION-A-YEAR NUMBER.
BUT IF $1 TRILLION WERE TO COME
FORTH FROM THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT IN A NUMBER OF YEARS
OVER ORDERLY FASHION, THAT'S
OKAY.
STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT HAVE
A HUGE ROLE TO PLAY AND ALSO THE
PRIVATE SECTOR.
YOU'VE PROBABLY HEARD THERE'S A
LIVELY DISCUSSION GOING ON ABOUT
HOW WE CAN USE MORE
PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN
SOME OF THESE INFRASTRUCTURE
CATEGORIES.
>> Sreenivasan: HOW DO YOU
CHANGE THE THINKING ABOUT THIS?
BECAUSE IT'S NOT VERY SEXY TO
FUND A NEW WATER MAIN OR WASTE
WATER SYSTEM THAT'S CRUCIAL.
AND YET, WE START TO THINK ABOUT
THIS IN VERY SPECIFIC TERMS WHEN
THERE'S A DAM THAT'S ABOUT TO
BREAK OR WHEN THERE'S A BRIDGE
THAT JUST COLLAPSED.
>> IT'S EASY TO TAKE FOR GRANTED
YOUR WATER SUPPLY, YOUR BRIDGES,
YOUR TUNNELS, UNTIL THEY'RE
SUDDENLY NOT THERE.
CERTAINLY IN THIS REGION, WE'VE
SEEN A NUMBER OF-- I SHOULD
POINT OUT TRANSIT WAS THE LOWEST
GRADED, "D-MINUS," ACROSS THE
COUNTRY, CERTAINLY HERE IN THE
WASHINGTON AREA, THE CAPITAL OF
THE UNITED STATES, A 40-YEAR-OLD
SYSTEM SHOWING SIGNS OF COMPLETE
BREAKDOWN AFTER DECADES OF
UNDER-INVESTMENT AND IGNORED
MAINTENANCE.
SO IT'S A WAKE-UP CALL FOR THE
COUNTRY.
PEOPLE NEED TO REALIZE THIS
ISSUE IS ALREADY COSTING EACH
FAMILY $9 A DAY.
AND WHAT OUR ECONOMIC STUDIES
SUGGEST IS THAT FOR AN
INVESTMENT OF JUST $3 A DAY
PER FAMILY, YOU COULD ELIMINATE
THAT DRAG ON THE ECONOMY, AND
IF WE DON'T WE'RE PUTTING AT
RISK 2.5 MILLION JOBS BY 2025
AND NEARLY $4 TRILLION IN U.S.
G.D.P.
THAT'S THE EQUIVALENT OF
GERMANY'S G.D.P.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
CASEY DINGES FROM THE AMERICAN
SOCIETY OF CIVIL ENGINEERS,
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> GOOD TO BE WITH YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: FINALLY, THE
SECRET SERVICE SAYS THERE WAS A
SECURITY BREACH AT THE WHITE
HOUSE LAST NIGHT, BUT THE
PRESIDENT WAS NEVER IN ANY
DANGER.
A MAN JUMPED THE FENCE JUST
BEFORE MIDNIGHT AND REACHED THE
EXECUTIVE MANSION'S SOUTH
GROUNDS BEFORE AGENTS ARRESTED
HIM.
THE INTRUDER WAS CARRYING A
BACKPACK, BUT IT DID NOT CONTAIN
WEAPONS OR HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.
PRESIDENT TRUMP SAID TODAY THE
SECRET SERVICE DID A "FANTASTIC
JOB" AND CALLED THE INTRUDER A
"TROUBLED PERSON."
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
GOOD NIGHT.